Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
the MG by Doctor Will Gervais. He's a reader
in the Center for Culture and Evolution at Brunel
University London. And today we're talking about his book
Disbelief The Origins of Atheism in the Religious Species.
So, Doctor Gervais, welcome to the show. It's a
big pleasure to everyone.
Thanks so much. It's a pleasure to be here.
So, I've already talked on the show with many,
many cognitive scientists of religion. So I guess this
will be a fun one. FIRST of all, why
do you say in the book that both religion
and atheism are evolutionary puzzles?
Yeah, I really tried to frame the book as
these being two related puzzles that we have to
solve just as a project in figuring out how
human nature works. And our species is a bit
of a weird one. We do a lot of
things that you don't see other members of the
animal kingdom doing, and a lot of our peculiarities
are kind of like an elaboration or exaggeration of
something else that we see elsewhere in the animal
kingdom. Whereas religion seems to be pretty much confined
to our species, so basically every culture we've known
has had expressed beliefs in various supernatural agents. They've
organized their lives around them. People are willing to
fight and die for belief in these gods, and
that's just not something that's widespread across the animal
kingdom. So one puzzle is the puzzle of faith.
So how, how is it that we're the only
religious species? Um, BUT religion, while it's universal in
our species, it's not 100% universal. We have, we
have a lot of people who are not religious
believers. Religion doesn't seem to be for them. And
in large parts of the world, the numbers of
atheists, and here atheists just means somebody who doesn't
believe in a God. THE numbers of atheists seem
to be swelling not evenly across the globe, but
in certainly large parts of the globe we're seeing
more and more atheists, which is interesting. So if
we've evolved to be a religious species, why do
we have so many atheists? And I've really had
a lot of fun over the years trying to
use atheism as a testing ground for our theories
of how religion works.
Great. Uh, BUT I mean, you, you say that
we are the only religious species, at least that
we know of, but are there any animal precursors
to religion or at least some of the behaviors
or psychological traits that we see associated with religiosity?
Um, YEAH, that's a fantastic question. I think we
could split it into kind of two. So one
of them is, do we see behavioral potential like
religion precursors and other species? There, I think we
don't have compelling evidence of that. So if other
animals do have religion, they express it very differently
than we do. Um. I think the trickier question
is, are there other animals that have kind of
some of the same cognitive building blocks that underpin
religion that might give us a capacity for belief
and there I think. Potentially, I think we'll probably
get to it, but one of the main cognitive
building blocks for religion in our species is it's
built on kind of foundations of social cognition and
mentalizing and mind perception, where our ability to imagine
gods is kind of piggybacking off of our ability
to realize that other people have minds. And that
kind of core cognitive mind perception ability, that one
we do see in some other species they seem
to have these, these same social cognitive faculties, not
quite as elaborated as ours, but if I were
to bet on where we might see some cognitive
building blocks of religion, I'd say if we look
in other social species where they've kind of evolved
the cognitive architecture to track each other's minds, there
we might, we might see some of the basic
building blocks for religion.
So before we get into an evolutionary take on
atheism and religion and address the puzzles here directly,
let me just ask you about some common misconceptions
that I think come from some popular takes on
atheism and religion that people have. So, uh, Of
course, one of them comes from Marxx. What did
Marx say about religion and what do you think
about it? And of course, in this particular case,
we tend to associate Marx with the expression or
the phrase religion is the opiate of the people.
So what do you think about it?
Yeah, the famous Marx aphorism that religion is the
opiate of the people. He kind of had that
to point out kind of how religion might lead
people to be docile and less than ideal living
circumstances. But within kind of scientific approaches to religion,
there's there's been some mileage off of that quote
in just recognizing that religion seems to be something
where our motivations are involved, and there are certain
living conditions where religion really seems to flourish. And
if we look cross culturally, we'll see that religion
seems to do really well in places where life
is a bit chaotic and unpredictable and uncertain. Um,
SO there's kind of a kernel of truth to
that one, but I think it makes an ultimately
unsatisfying scientific explanation for how religion works, because the
fact that certain religions can give people comfort in
trying times that doesn't tell us that religions evolved
specifically to do that. They seem like a really
clunky adaptation for giving people a bit of peace
of mind. So what does You know, it seems
like there'd be simpler ways to give people some
peace of mind than have them imagining elaborate pantheons
and then having to sacrifice time and behavior and
lives to satisfy those. And I think also it
runs up against just kind of some inconvenient facts
about religion in the world. So if it's the
case that religion evolved as the opiate of the
masses to make people feel good and trying circumstances.
Yeah, sure, that might explain why we have supernatural
concepts like heaven where, you know, this world's rough,
but you know someday you'll die and then you'll
get to live happily ever after with all of
your loved ones in eternal bliss, and that sounds
wonderful. But then what about things like hell? If
anything, hell's worse than our current world. So that
seems a poor explanation for where religion came from
if some features of that are recurring across world
religions aren't particularly good for people's momentary peace of
mind. So the opiate account doesn't explain some of
the particularities of religion, like why, how come they're
focused on supernatural agents, and it also doesn't do
a great job of explaining kind of. Facets of
religion that we see time and again, uh, like
negative outcomes, I guess.
Yeah, and not just hell, but I guess that,
uh, I mean, the opiate of the masses, it
seems as if it's just about the fun activities
and distracting people from the bad negative aspects of
life. But uh there's Also things that people have
to participate in very frequently related to, for example,
um uh to, for, uh, to, for example, uh
and uh credibility enhancing displays that are very demanding,
right. Yeah, you can look at some of the
costly demands that big religions kind of invoke from
people, and you know, you'll have things like dietary
prohibition. Some religions say these are kinds of food
that you can't have, or, you know, vows of
celibacy, abstinence, things like that. So there's a lot
of things that are really commonplace in religions that
seem to have nothing at all to do with
kind of comfort and peace of mind.
And what about genetics? For the past, I don't
know, a few decades, 23 decades now and then
we hear in the press, in the news, something
like, oh, they found the god gene or they
found the aggression gene, something, uh, I, I mean,
they tend to oversimplify how genetics work and then
they call a specific gene, the X gene, the
Y gene, something like that. So, are there god
genes and does it make any sense at all
to talk about them?
Um, YEAH, so as you mentioned, over the years
there has been a lot of kind of behavioral
genetic looks to see if we can find some
genetic underpinnings of individual differences in religious fervor. And
some of those efforts have been reasonably successful where
people can say, right, it does look like kind
of strength of religiosity is heritable. It seems to
run in families more than you'd expect. Um, BUT
I guess for me the problem with genetic studies
is that they're answering a different question than the
one I'd like to answer. So Genetic studies are
about kind of the physical encoding of religious impulses,
so we might be able to figure out that
some, some alleles might code for underlying traits that
make people susceptible to being more religious or less
religious, whereas what I'm really interested in in answering
the puzzle of faith is, well, how is it
and why did our species evolve to be the
only religious one. Um, AND from my perspective, the
genetic stuff is great. It's super important. It's just
answering a different question. It's asking how this stuff
is encoded, but it's not, it's not answering those
ultimate why questions of why did religion evolve in
our species. So yeah, it's useful work, but it's
operating at kind of a mechanistic level instead of
a broader evolutionary level.
And so it's, of course, just by itself not
good enough to explain religion as a phenomenon, right?
Yeah, and most of the behavioral genetic work is
looking at like individual differences in kind of religious
fervor, which is great. It's important to study that,
but it's very different from trying to figure out,
you know, how come we have religion and echidnas
don't have religion. Obviously genes will be involved in
that because that's, you know, in genetic evolution that's
what tracks species divergence, but figuring out the genes
won't necessarily tell us how we got there.
OK, so now let's talk a little bit about
the new wave fists because they have some very
interesting and particular takes on religion and I have
2 or 3 claims made by them here. So,
starting with one made uh specifically by Richard Dawkins
and this theory that religion is the result of
childhood gullibility. I mean, is there any, does it
hold any water?
Yeah, so that's, that's kind of an idea that
he sketched out first in the God delusion and
then about 15 years later in his second religion
book Outgrowing God. And he doesn't frame it as,
you know, we've proven this, but he kind of
says, hey, here's an idea I like. And how
he puts it is, you know, our species, we
need to like members of our species need to
learn how to survive and thrive in the world.
And there's threats out there that we can't try
to figure out just through trial and error. So,
you know, are there predators down in the river
where we get our water? Is there a crocodile
in there? Are there jaguars in this patch of
forest? Um, I, I could try to learn that
through trial and error, but the errors are fatal,
so that's not going to be great. Um, IN
a social species like ours, we can rely on
information that other people give us, and that's hugely
important for us. So in the Dawkins model, the
way he sketched it out, he said, maybe our
species evolved so that kids just kind of are
blindly credulous and gullible when it comes to stuff
that their parents and elders tell them. So maybe
we've evolved to have a mental shortcut that just
says believe whatever mom and dad tell you or
your grandparents or whoever in your community is kind
of like those respected authority figures and you just
blindly defer to whatever they say and Dawkins explicitly
says, you know, these kids would have no way
to distinguish between good information and bad. So we're
overly credulous, overly gullible, and because kind of bad
information can sneak along for the ride. Um, MAYBE
that's how religions just kind of piggyback on this
gullibility, and it's really easy for kids to just
tell their parents like, yep, there's jaguars over there.
You've got to avoid that patch of the stream
because there's crocodiles. Also there's these forest spirits and
you have to worship them this way and this
way. And then the kids would say, OK, I'm
just going to believe these things. I'm not sifting
them into some of these are factual claims about
the world. Some of them are supernatural claims. Kids
just broad spectrum believe whatever they're told. And I
think this does on the surface sound plausible, and
you know he's an excellent writer, so I think
it sounds rhetorically compelling when he lays it out
on the page. The problem is, um, we can
turn to the scientific subdisciplines that actually study this
stuff, um, and so we could look at, say,
cultural evolution is a scientific subfield where we're trying
to apply the tools of evolutionary biology to cultural
information. And it uses formal modeling and computer simulations
and real world observation. So it's the field that
is all about how do people culturally learn from
each other. And if we turn to theory in
that in that line of work and say, well,
how about this initial assumption that Dawkins has? Is
it, would we expect our species or any other
to evolve such that kids are just blindly gullible
and believe whatever their parents tell them? Um, AND
pretty quickly the theory would say no. We wouldn't
expect anybody to evolve to just blindly believe whatever
they're told. In the same way we wouldn't expect
universal cooperation to solve, which is like something he
wrote all of the selfish genes about why we
wouldn't expect kind of uncritical altruists to take over
in populations because they're suckers. They're easily exploited, and
I think the gullible kids model is just building
that into our kids. It's making, it's positing a
psychology that's too easily exploitable to have ever really
evolved. Um, SO it doesn't pass the theoretical smell
test from cultural evolution. Now we could try the
empirical smell test of we could turn to instead
of cultural evolution, we could now turn to developmental
psychology. So these are the people who are actually
studying children. How do children learn? How do children
think about facts? How do children form beliefs and,
and so on. And if we look at Evidence
from that line of work. So the Dawkins model
says, well, kids won't have any way to sift
good information from bad. So you have good factual
information about where the predators are and then junk
religious stuff in the Dawkins model, and he's saying
kids can't tell the difference between those, so they
just believe everything. Turns out if you, if you
check the developmental psychology work, kids are really good
at sorting things into a fact pile and an
opinion pile. Um, HERE'S a fiction pile, you can
get kids to, for instance, you could ask them,
you know, does SpongeBob, what does SpongeBob think about
Batman? So they're thinking about fictional characters. They know
they're both fictional and they can imagine the beliefs
of these fictional characters. And they're never confused about
whether these characters are real. They know that there's
no no Batman out there. They know there's no
SpongeBob. Um, SO when we check the developmental psychology
evidence, we see kids are pretty good at sorting
things into fact piles and opinion piles or fact
and fiction piles, and people like Larissa Hai Solomon
and developmental like when they ask kids about, well,
where, where do religious beliefs fit? Do they go
in the fact pile? Do they go in this
kind of other weird opinion fiction pile? They, they
put religion kind of in the middle. They don't
know what to do with it. Religious claims are
not quite facts. They're not just opinions, um, which
is super interesting work. I highly recommend people check
it out, but it directly contradicts what Dawkins is
saying about how kids learn. Um, SO I think
the childhood gullibility model that he floated in two
books across 15 years was never all that theoretically
plausible when you look at the cultural evolution literature
and empirically it just describes a child psychology that's
very different from what the last 40 to 50
years of developmental psychology would tell us to expect.
And I also think, and please correct me if
I'm wrong, but if we were going to explain
religious beliefs on the basis of childhood gullibility, wouldn't
we also have to explain how was it that,
uh, people would go from childhood, childhood. UP to
adulthood without changing their beliefs, without developing new, at
least new cognitive cognitive mechanisms to then be able
to perhaps question some of the things they were
told when they were younger. I mean, wouldn't, uh,
Dawkins also have to explain that?
Yeah, absolutely. So it fundamentally posits static psychology where
a belief gets locked in in childhood and then
it's there forever. But I mean, if you talk
to kids, their beliefs and attitudes will change massively
from year to year. So imagining that much gets
locked in from gullible kids stage through the lifespan
just doesn't seem super plausible to me.
So another thing that the new atheists claim, and
this is sort of common among atheists in general,
is that atheism is more rational than religion. So
what does science have to say about that?
Yeah, I mean that's, that's, I would say certainly
out of new atheist land that's their dominant explanation
of where atheism comes from. It's, you know, well,
how did we become atheists? Well, religion's irrational, and
I'm a rational person and I'm smart enough to
see through the religious flim plan and that's why
I'm an atheist. And in our scientific work, I
mean, I can't directly make claims on is religion
rational, but I can ask kind of the psychological
question of does it seem to be the case
that individual rationality is a good explanation for where
atheism comes from. So now instead of trying to
make claims about religion, I'm trying to make claims
of how do people become religious or atheists and
so In their model, we could sensibly predict that
well if rationality is really the key to atheism,
we'd expect for instance that people who seem to
be a bit better at rational thinking are going
to be more likely to be atheists. Everybody, we
have kind of different ways to process information, and
one of them is kind of effortful, rational thinking.
Um, OR we can just kind of go on
easy mode and follow our gut level intuitions, and
these are two separate kind of psychological systems. We
all have both of them, but there are individual
differences in how much people lean on one or
the other. So from kind of this new atheist
rational atheism model, we could come up with a
pretty straightforward prediction that people who tend to be
more rational are going to be the people who
also tend to be atheists, um. And it turns
out there's been a reasonable amount of work on
that over the last decade, 15 years, and early
on it looked promising. So 3 different research teams
in 2012, including one that I led, published really,
really similar papers. None of us had been in
touch with each other beforehand, and all these papers
came out within a span of month, so it
was kind of fun. And we each had at
least one study where we just did a correlational
approach. We measured people's cognitive style on that sort
of intuitive versus effortful analytic rational thinking continuum and
saw where people fell on that. And then we'd
also ask people about religious beliefs just so we
could check, is it the case that the atheists
are also kind of the people scoring on the
rational end of that spectrum. AND all three papers
reported that same correlation, so people who scored as
more rational also looked less religious. Two of the
papers also included experimental manipulations that potentially could get
at issues of causation, where basically two of the
papers found ways to try to nudge people to
think a bit more rationally, and then you ask
them about religion just to see if now they're
reporting being a bit less religious, if we've gotten
them to think more rationally. And those initial experiments,
it looked compelling, so there was a lot of
kind of press and media attention on all of
these papers, and they were celebrated within new atheist
circles of, you know, here's definitive scientific evidence that
we're the rational ones, and that's where atheism comes
from and it's cited in some of the new
atheist books that are out there, but the catch
is the evidence is not good, which we know
now, so. Um, PRETTY early on when those papers
came out they made a bit of a splash
and other teams kind of said, all right, let's
let's dig into these findings a bit further. And
so I think one of mine was the first
one to come up against replication challenges where other
teams out there said, hey, we're going to try
to run the same study with tighter controls. And
so the first team was by led by Bob
Kallen Jagerman and and his his team. And they
got in touch and they wanted to replicate really
kind of a weird flashy study that we had
in one of my papers where we had had
people look at artwork. Here's here's how we were
trying to prime people to think more rational versus
intuitive. So we'd have people look at artwork and
it was either the thinker sculpture or we had
the guy throwing the biscus, just got ales of
M. WAS our kind of control artwork where it
looked the same. It's a sculpture. It has similar
position, but it's not connoting this deep, deep effortful
thinking. And in our study people who saw the
Thinker reported being a little bit less religious. Um,
IF that sounds kind of silly, yeah, it was
a silly study. It was, you know, pre-replication crisis
was the YOLO days of social psych where, you
know. Yeah, flashy experimental manipulation, small sample sizes, ad
hoc measures cobbled together on the fly, and then,
yeah, sure you can, you can find whatever you
want. And so what happened then, and that was,
you know, widespread across the field. So naturally when
Bob and his team wanted to replicate that, this
is right around the time where I had started
thinking more seriously about methodology as like as the
psychology replication crisis was starting to gain some momentum.
And I pretty quickly realized like this is not
my, my study is definitely going to be one
of these ones that doesn't replicate because there's small
tiny sample sizes. It was a cute little flashy
experimental manipulation that we just designed for that test,
did pretty like minimal validation work on it. Um,
SO these are all like the pink to red
flags that we now know are flagging work that's
probably not going to replicate well. So I wasn't
terribly surprised when their effort turned up, hey, this
experimental manipulation didn't seem to do what we thought
it did. And so those results looked like false
positives, and that happened with some of the other
experimental studies like experimentally trying to nudge people around
to think more rationally and then ask about religious
belief. So pretty early on, I think we gave
up on the idea that the experiments could provide
good evidence for this rational atheism thesis. Our experimental
prods to make people think more rationally weren't doing
anything. Um, BUT there were still those correlational findings
that each of our papers had a correlational study
where people who seem to have a more rational
cognitive style were also more likely to be atheists,
and that's a super simple study to run. So
a bunch of people have run it by now.
There have been meta-analysis. Gordon Penny Cook and his
team ran a good meta-analysis. Where they squished together
a few dozen of these studies and said, All
right, if you look across all these studies, there's
a small negative correlation between a rational cognitive style
and religious belief. People who are more rational tend
to report being a little bit less religious, but
it's not a strong correlation. And then in some
follow-up work that the team did with me, we
kind of shipped the same study task to 13
different countries to look for this correlation. And it
turns out the correlation is, you know, small but
stable in the US and in North America. In
a lot of our European countries, it disappeared entirely.
We had a couple of countries where it looked
like the direction flipped. So there is this correlation
in US samples where people who score more rationally
look a bit less religious, but it's a little
tiny correlation that's not going to explain much about
atheism. And also that correlation disappears in a lot
of places where you could do the same study.
Um, SO I think on that one we said
that the correlation between rational thinking and atheism is
weak and fickle. It's not something we should hang
our hat on and say this is where atheism
comes from, because all of the sensible scientific predictions
you could derive from kind of the new atheist,
atheism is rational model. When you derive those predictions
and test them with human subjects, they don't work.
So that that's an idea that I thought sounded
plausible enough that I sunk, you know, years of
my early career trying to study this. And the
results, I think, just have been too unimpressive over
the years to really place much stock in that
as an explanation for atheism around the globe.
So let's talk about just one last, the last
set of claims before we move on to other
topics. So this is also coming from the new
atheists and it is two different kinds of claims.
The first one is that religion is psychologically harmful
and that it is transmitted, the second claim is
that it is transmitted. To between minds like a
virus. And here, I'm not sure if they are
literally saying that we should use a virology model
of transmission to study the transmission of religious ideas
or beliefs, or if it's just a metaphor, but
uh what would you have to say about those
claims?
Yeah, so I could take those in turns. So
first, the new atheists, especially as kind of part
of their broader political project, really seemed keen to
point out that there's a lot of problems in
the world that we can just blame religion for
because religion is kind of a net negative for
humanity and probably the domain where they applied this
the most would be in talking about kind of
global conflict and violence and things like terrorism. And
it's maybe most vividly illustrated by Richard Dawkins wrote
an op ed just a few days after 9/11
called Religion's Misguided Missiles, where he basically said what
caused the events of 9/11 wasn't some broad geopolitical
dispute. It was just people who were too dumb
and unattractive to get by in this world are
trying to kill themselves to satisfy their God, to
get virgins in heaven. And he said that very
directly. He basically said, look at these pathetic losers.
Religion motivated them to do this. And then he
went on to say, religion also, I think he
said religions like the great monotheisms and the Abrahamic
faiths, having them in the world is like leaving
loaded guns on the street, which these are incredibly
strong claims, saying that religion is a key global
driver of violence or terrorism. And this is one
where again there's scientists out there doing the work
to look at the relationship between religious beliefs and
practices and different outcomes like violence, and people have
been doing this work going back to, you know,
you can look up William James writing in the
late 1800s where he talks about how, you know,
there's a lot of things that Look like religion's
causing a problem in the world, but if you
dig deeper, a lot of the times it's other
factors that religion's incidentally bound up with, which is
what we'd expect. Religion's a cross cultural, human, universal.
It's going to be associated with a lot of
things because it's everywhere. If we could find a
problem in the world that it seemed like religion
had no ties to, that would be surprising because
religion has ties to everything. Um, SO, if you
look at people who do a lot of work
actually trying to understand the relationships between religion and
terrorism. You've got work by like Scott Atran, Jeremy
Ginges, people like that who are actually doing the
work. They're going to kind of conflict regions, interviewing
combatants, families of people who have died in conflict,
just to say, well, what motivated these people? What's
motivating you to, you know, consider suicide terrorism as
an avenue? Um, THE new atheist model where they're
saying people are doing this to please their gods
because religion's the ultimate bad guy. The prediction there
would be that we should expect that violent conflict
or terrorism is predicted by indices of people's kind
of personal beliefs in this God. They're trying to
please God so their beliefs in God should matter.
Um, WHAT Atri Genes and others find is that
actually that that's not a great predictor. Uh, WHAT
is a good predictor is people's kind of sense
of shared bonds with their fellow humans in their
group. Um, SO a suicide terrorist isn't killing themselves
for their God. They're sacrificing their life, their life
to help their buddies, basically. They're, they're viewing it,
it's, you know, it's team conflict, it's coalitional conflict,
so sacrificing yourself to help your people is very
different from sacrificing yourself because you think your God
wants it. And Jeremy Gini, his team over the
years. HAS done a lot of work where they'll
ask people, OK, you know, they'll they'll go to
regions where there's intergroup conflict that seems to cleave
across religious lines, and they've done this in other
contexts and um They'll kind of ask people, well,
how do you feel about people on the other
side, your enemies? Do you dehumanize them? Are you
prejudiced against them? Do you think their lives are
worth less than kind of your team's lives? And
so they'll get people's own personal answers and then
they'll ask them the same questions and they'll say,
All right, now adopt the perspective of your God.
Do you think your God thinks these people are
worthless? Do you think your God hates these people?
Um, AND there it turns out that people will
report that their God is more tolerant than they
are. So they'll say, yeah, I think these people
are scum. God's OK with them, but I hate
these people. So generally across several studies now, people's
gods seem to be viewed as more tolerant than
they themselves are. So people aren't aren't fighting the
other team to please God. They're doing it in
spite of the fact that they think God is
actually kind of more tolerant, um. So that's at
least a couple of different ways. I guess I
could mention one more line of evidence is Jeremy
Gingess, Ian Hanson, RN O and Zion. They had
another project looking at suicide terrorism where you look
at what predicts people holding positive attitudes of suicide
terrorism and suicide terrorists, and they would actually try
to tease apart different religious dimensions. So one of
them is things like connection felt connection to a
god, which you might index with, say, a frequency
of private prayer. Um, THAT'S distinct from kind of
your coalitional hanging out with the buddies stuff, which
that one you could index with frequency of religious
attendance. So how many times a week do you
go to the place where other religious people are
and hang out with them? And in that work
it turns out that the coalitional stuff, so religious
attendance that predicts more support for terrorism, whereas the
private belief stuff indexed by prayer frequency predicts less
support. So across all these different lines of evidence
we're pretty consistently finding that The evidence doesn't look
like what you'd expect if people were engaging in
these kinds of violent actions to please a God.
It almost looks like people are engaging in violent
actions on behalf of their teammates, kind of knowing
full well that they don't think God's necessarily as
into it as they are.
So, I mean, when it comes to things like
terrorism, for example, probably it's better for us to
look at the social, economic, political factors than religious
factors. I mean, it's not that religion couldn't play
any role at all, but simply reducing it to
people being religious or not is not very helpful
when it comes to a proper scientific explanation, right?
Yeah, absolutely. I think if we want to understand
what's driving these things, yeah, there will be some
religious factors that are bound up in it, but
I think if you want to understand the deeper
psychology, it really seems like understanding those kind of
coalitional ties to other people seems to be the
kind of the most important thing. It's the sense
of community that we're defending and religions can be
good at building communities, but it's not necessarily like
the supernatural connection to God, that's, that's the coalitional
problem.
Uh, AND what about the second, uh, set of
claims about religion being transmitted like a virus between
Ms?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Um, SORRY, I missed that
one. YEAH, so that idea and that they've been
tinkering with that idea, probably going back to 76
when the Selfish Gene came out. The final chapter
of that, Dawkins says, all right. We just had
the rest, the beginning part of this book is
understanding how we could genetically evolve into a cooperative
species and then in the final chapter he kind
of says, well, what about culture? How does culture
work? Could we think of culture as an evolutionary
process? So he speculated that in genetic evolution we
have genes which are discrete bits of information encoded
in DNA. That's what gets passed across generations. We're
just kind of these big lumbering vehicles that, you
know, usher our genes into the future. So he
said, Well, what if instead of little bits of
genetic information, what if there's little bits of cultural
information floating around and he called these memes, which
we still have that word, although it's changed from
a serious scientific proposal of how culture works to
it's, you know, now it's like cute kitten videos
on the internet, but in that model, in the
memetic model, um, these, these memes are just floating
around in the world. They're trying to recruit our
attention, so our brains are kind of the substrate
that allow for memetic evolution. Um, AND in their
model, our brains just kind of they're along for
the ride. They can get hijacked by means you
act as viruses that then make us behave in
ways that just spread the meme. Um, SO yeah,
they do explicitly liken it to a virus and
you still hear that lingo in a lot of
culture war stuff they'll say, oh, such and such
is a mind virus, and it's just kind of
Co-opting memetic language from the 70s, but memetics sputtered
and then never really took off as a serious
sign of cultural evolution. It looked promising for a
while, but it kind of built in some assumptions
of how learning would work or how cultural evolution
could work that just didn't age well. So it
built in the assumption that these memes are discrete
bits of cultural information that are passed on largely
intact from one mind to another. Um, TURNS out
that's not how human learning works. Um, WE can
learn stuff, but it gets modified in transit. Um,
IT'S not super high fidelity, cultural learning, we get
errors in all the time. I can learn something
and then Either accidentally change it or I can
actually innovate. So I might think of a better
way to do something. So now I change this
cultural information before I pass it on to other
people, which is not at all what the memetic
kind of view is. Here it's the information remains
unchanged and just hops from brain to brain. It
seems like that idea failed largely just because it's
not an accurate description of how cultural evolution works,
and gradually over time memetics just kind of got
subsumed into the broader study of cultural evolution without,
in my opinion, having a huge impact. So this
is one of the scientific ideas that it seems
to have had a large cultural impact without having
a large scientific impact first, which is kind of
interesting. So if they're saying that religions are these
memes that hop from mind to mind like viruses.
Well, it turns out that's not how cultural learning
works in the first place, so it's again positing
the wrong mechanism for culture and then probably reaching
incorrect conclusions about it. Now that doesn't mean that
religion's not socially transmitted, but it's, it's not the
case that we're kind of these hapless vehicles who
just get hijacked by means floating around. That's not
how we work.
And so, uh, earlier, we've talked about one possible
approach to religion which was based on genetics. What
about cognitive science of religion? I mean, how does
it approach the study of religion?
I think cognitive science of religion is an exciting
approach that I think really was kind of the
first systematic attempt to try to understand how religion
works from kind of a mechanistic cognitive and Darwinian
framework. So it's a good approach to try to
tell a compelling evolutionary story about religion. And looping
back to me talking about the puzzles of faith
and atheism, I think it was a good early
attempt to answer the puzzle of faith. And so
the cognitive science of religion kind of started catching
momentum in the late 90s, early 2000s and it
is an interdisciplinary group of, you know, some philosophers,
cognitive scientists, developmental psychologists, social psychologists getting together and
kind of trying to sketch out plausible ways that
we could think about how our species would evolve
into a religious one. And I think they had
some really important insights and really helped progress the
field. And I think some of the, some of
the initial work hasn't held up super well, but
I still think that we all owe a great
debt to cognitive science and religion for really starting
the ball rolling and setting the research program. And
I think the research program was pretty successful for
10 or 15 years, and I think the kind
of best things to come out of that approach
are viewing, so we could think of, you know,
how did our species evolve to have a given
trait, whether it's bipedalism or religion or anything else
we could say, all right, you could have that
trait because that's a directly selected adaptation. So bipedalism
seems to be an adaptation that benefited our ancestors,
um. But things can also be kind of culturally
widespread species universals, not because they have any direct
adaptive function, but because they're a byproduct of something
else. So a good example here is like our
teeth are kind of white. It's not because there's
any survival advantage to having white teeth, but there
is a survival advantage to having teeth that are
really hard. Um, SO we've evolved to have an
enamel layer on our teeth that I believe is
calcium phosphate, um, which is really hard and durable,
which is what you want teeth to be. It
happens to be white. So here the adaptation is
we need hard teeth, the byproduct is they ended
up being white just because that's how it worked.
Um, SO cognitive scientists of religion. Uh, DID a
lot of kind of asking the world, well, is
religion an adaptation and if so, for what? Or
does it make more sense to think of our
capacity for religion as a byproduct of other things?
And the general consensus out of a lot of
this work is that religion comes naturally to us
humans, but not because it's an adaptation, but more
because it's a byproduct of other stuff and especially
they kind of homed in on It seems like
the capacity for religious belief might be an evolutionary
byproduct of the fact that we evolved as a
hypersocial species who we need to keep track of
each other's minds. And once you have that ability
to track other minds, it's kind of easy for
religion to piggyback off of that. So I don't
think we evolved to have religion, but I think
religion's a really good fit for the minds that
we evolved as kind of a social species.
And what do you make of the cognitive mechanisms
that people in the cognitive science of religion have
been suggesting that supposedly underlie religious thinking, like, for
example, core knowledge that includes Intuitive physics, intuitive biology,
and intuitive psychology or theory of mind, the hyperactive
agency detection device, minimally counterintuitive ideas, uh teleological thinking,
uh, and things like that. What do you make
of that?
Yeah, I think cognitive science of religion did a
great job of kind of identifying a lot of
small cognitive biases that might nudge us a little
bit in one way or another, so. Yeah, you
were mentioning these kind of core domains of knowledge,
so we think about physical objects in ways that
are different from the way we think about animals,
and that's different from the way we think about
people with really complex psychology, and that's because we
have different cognitive systems for tracking it. We have
a folk physics that can think of like, oh,
solid objects can't pass through each other. Objects kind
of continue in their same normal motion unless they're
impinged upon by something else. So you seem to
have these kind of built in assumptions about how
the physical world works. And we have similar expectations
in the folk biological realm where we can think
about living things, and then we have folk psychology
which is tracking kind of human interactions and mind
perception. And so if we have these separate cognitive
systems, cognitive scientists of religion have said, well, maybe
these different systems each have their own little biases,
and if you put a bunch of those together,
they kind of point us towards religion. And so
they've identified a few specific ways this could work.
Uh, SO one of them is this hyperactive agency
detection device is something that was postulated back in
the 90s where people said, well, we need to
survive in the world and there's other agents in
the world that are threats. So agents could be
predators. So if I'm walking through the woods at
night and I hear a snapping stick, it could
just be that, you know, it's the wind and
a stick broke, no big deal, or it could
be that there's a bear around the corner. Now
if I assume that there's no bear and I
go on walking and there's a bear there, I
get mauled and I'm dead. Whereas if I assume
that every snapping stick is a threat, I can
avoid danger in the world, and most of the
time I'm avoiding danger that was never there. But
if there is enough danger out there, then it
could be good to have a bias to just
assume that lots of things out there in the
world are caused by intentional agents even if they're
not. And Barrett and others termed this hyperactive agency
detection device, and Barrett, especially in his books, has
said this could be a key building block of
religion if we're mistakenly detecting agency out in the
world and then upon investigation, you know, we didn't
find the bearer around the corner. We didn't. We
heard the noise and there was nothing there. He
said, Well, maybe if this kind of, you know,
over detective agency detection is happening enough, instead of
us just dismissing the false alarms, we might start
to think, you know what, maybe there is a
supernatural agent out there. Maybe there's a spirit in
the woods that's making these sounds, um. And so
he's kind of said that hyperactive agency detection device
might be kind of the first core building block
that would predispose us to thinking about um kind
of supernatural agents in the world, um. And that
one interestingly you'll find it cited in scientific papers
today. It's been discussed heavily in books by cognitive
scientists of religion, but it's also reached some escape
velocity. So if you open like Michael Shermer's books
about beliefs, you'll have a whole section on agency
detection and a agenticity. So this is an idea
that it's super popular within cognitive science and religion
to the point where people kind of one step
removed, have heard of it and take it seriously.
But what's unreal to me over the years is
if you track back, so if I found a
citation to hyperactive agency detection in the literature today,
I could follow that academic citation. I might find
a paper 5 years ago that's talking about it.
OK, so I'll open that paper and I'll see
where they talk about hyperactive agency detection. OK, they're
citing another paper. Um, AND if you trace it
back, what's weird is you never get back to
an original empirical result. So this isn't a case
that people found the evidence for a hyperactive agency
detection device and then found evidence linking it to
religion, and that's why people have been talking about
it for 20 years as best as my colleagues
and I can tell, when you trace it back
and try to find, you know, what, where are
the papers that started this all. You find a
few like review papers in the 90s that all
kind of cite each other where they're saying like,
oh, there's hyperactive agency. Some people would cite faces
in the clouds by Stuart Guthrie, where he's talking
about a tendency for anthropomorphism. So anthropomorphism is kind
of attributing humanlike stuff to nonhumans. Um, BUT none
of this work actually ever established that we have
a hyperactive agency detection device, and nobody's ever empirically
demonstrated its link to religion. It's kind of been
assumed into the literature for long enough that it's,
it's an idea that you'll see sighted, but there's,
I don't think there was ever actually particularly compelling
scientific evidence to support it. Now hyperactive agency detection
device was just kind of one of these cognitive
building blocks that cognitive scientists of religion postulated. And
I don't think that one's held up well, but
some of the other ones that they've brought up,
I think, have stood the test of time a
lot better. So one of them is mind-body dualism.
So since we have kind of a folk psychology
which is different from our folk biology and our
folk physics, we're pretty good about thinking about minds
as being distinct from bodies, and we have our
mind perception mentalizing abilities that are good at thinking
about minds. And so folks like Paul Bloom has
been big on dualism over the years. They'd say
if we're good at thinking about mind stuff as
being distinct from body stuff. Why couldn't we just
think about mind stuff that exists separate from the
body stuff? So here we could have disembodied supernatural
minds that we can still use our, our mind
perception faculties to kind of think about and reason
about and interact with, but they're never actually linked
to a body. So that to me seems like
a lot more kind of plausible origin story for
these beliefs than a hyperactive agency detection device because
with dualism, we're inferring the existence of minds. We're
not detecting anything, um. Some of the other cognitive
building blocks from cognitive science and religion. Deborah Kelleman
has done a lot of good work on what
she's termed promiscuous teleology. So teleological thinking is kind
of attributing function and purpose to things. So if
I if I held up a hammer and said,
What is this, what is this for? Why is
it like this, you'd say, well, It's designed that
way so you can hit stuff and it's probably
got the little claw things in case you want
to pull the nail back up. So we're looking
at the features of something and then inferring a
deeper purpose or functionality to it, which totally makes
sense if we're looking at human-made artifacts. They were
designed with something in mind, but for like features
of the natural world, you know, if I hold
up a rock and say, why is it this
shape, you might give me a physical explanation where
you'd say, Well, it looks like it broke in
two and so you've got these craggy bits because
of like stuff. Um, BUT if you talk to,
for instance, smaller children, And you say, well, why
is this rock pointy? They will kind of give
you a teleological answer. They might say, Well, that
rock's pointy the animal needs to scratch an itch.
Or if you say, oh, like, why, why is
it raining? They're not going to say, Well, there's
condensation in the upper atmosphere, and then that turns
into raindrops and they fall. They'll say, Well, yeah,
there's rain so that flowers can have water. Maybe
if you say, well, why do flowers need water?
It's like, oh, because animals want to smell them.
Um, SO especially younger kids have this bias to
assume that things are happening for a reason. They're
attributing purpose to lots of things, which I think
if you pair that with ideas about, say, dualism,
you can get some mileage where if we're imagining
that there's disembodied kind of supernatural minds out there,
those could be the things that give purpose to
the stuff that we kind of readily infer is
there, um. And there have been some other CSR
ideas, so there's minimally counterintuitive agents. That's kind of
another kind of popular idea that pops up here.
The idea here is if you've got a folk
psychological system for tracking minds and a folk physics
system that's tracking physical objects, these systems kind of
come with their default assumptions about the world. Um,
WHICH just helps us get through the world easily,
but if you tweak some of those assumptions, you
can create kind of interesting and memorable concepts. So
if I had you think about, all right, imagine
somebody who's basically a person, but they don't have
a physical body and they can like travel through
walls. OK, so that's something that satisfies my folk
psychology assumptions but has weird properties in terms of
my assumptions about people from folk physics. And if
you tweak those settings just a little bit, you
get what's called a minimally counterintuitive concept. So something
that largely fits what we're expecting but is tweaked
a little bit, and there's some telling work that
these minimally counterintuitive things are more memorable. So if
I, if I have a story sprinkled with a
few things that tweak our expectations, that helps it
kind of linger in memory, which, you know, across
subsequent cultural transmission, memorability could be really important. If
we have a hard time remembering something we're not
going to pass it on, um. So yeah, had
minimally counterintuitive stuff, mind-body dualism, teleological thinking. These are
all the sorts of kind of individual smaller cognitive
biases that in the cognitive science of religion they'd
say, Well, if you put enough of these things
together, they all nudge us a little bit towards
religion and if you've got enough of them, then
we go all the way towards religion. So that's,
I'd say the general approach.
Mhm. But when it comes to nudging us toward
religion, do we have enough evidence to claim that
we are innately predisposed to religiosity?
Yeah, I mean, I'm always a bit hesitant to
talk about what we innately do, so I'd say
we innately have the capacity for religion. I think
most people have kind of enough of these cognitive
building blocks that we have a really easy time
thinking religious thoughts, and some figures in the cognitive
science of religion would stop there and they'd say,
yeah, if we have enough of these building blocks
and enough of these little biases, that's where religious
belief comes from. Um, AND I've never been super
persuaded by that angle because I don't think they
actually have a mechanism built in for understanding how
beliefs happen. So I think all of the cognitive
science and religion biases, whether it's dualism or teleological
thinking, I think that's they do a great job
of explaining why religious concepts look the way they
do across cultures. So every, every world religion has
The notion of disembodied supernatural agents dualism can tell
us a lot about why that's the case. These
supernatural agents give us some meaning and purpose. All
right, teleological thinking thinking can help us explain why
the gods of different religions are like that. But
neither of those tells us why people believe in
these gods or why some people don't believe in
these gods, or why people over here believe in
this God and people over here believe in a
different god. So I think it's those harder questions
about patterns of belief and disbelief. I think asking
those questions starts to lay bare kind of some
limitations in the cognitive science of religion approach because
I think it's doing a good job of answering
questions about why religion looks the way it does,
but it does less of a solid job at
explaining why individual people do than any of these
supernatural agents.
Uh, WHAT about cultural evolutionary theory? What do you
think it adds to the picture when it comes
to understanding religion?
Yeah, so cultural evolution is a vibrant scientific subfield
that's really been coalescing over the last 30, 40,
50 years, and the basic idea is what if
we take the established theoretical and methodological toolkit of
evolutionary biology and then tweak it a bit to
reflect cultural learning instead, because if we think kind
of at the broadest sense of what are the
kind of key ingredients that we need to have
an evolutionary process. Uh, YOU need some variability among,
you know, individual units in a population. You need
a mechanism of inheritance where like parents are like
offspring more than, more than you'd expect by chance.
And then you need fitness consequences where among all
the variability in the population, some variants do better
than others. And if you have those ingredients, variability,
consequences, and inheritance, you have the potential for an
evolutionary process. Um, AND that clearly works really well
if we're thinking about genetic evolution. So we have
huge variability in genotypes and phenotypes. There's consequences associated
with that. And then we have, uh, you know,
sexual reproduction in our species as the. MECHANISM of
inheritance. Um, AND so you'll see a lot of
work focusing on particularities of genetic inheritance and this
is how evolution has to work. But at the
end, we need, we can step back and say
all you need is inheritance, variability consequences, and culture
shows all of those things. There's a huge diversity
in cultural practices, beliefs, norms, etc. Um, WE have
social learning processes that that's our mechanism of inheritance,
and then there are kind of fitness consequences. Some
cultural traits do better than others. Um, SO since
we have those building blocks, I think it makes
productive sense to think of culture as an evolutionary
process, and cultural evolution has been a good mix
of, you know, ecologists, evolutionary biologists, anthropologists, people with
good training in the kind of the mathematical toolkit
of modern evolutionary theory are saying let's take evolutionary
theory and adapt it to how culture is different
from genes. Um, AND in that work, uh, they've
done a good job of thinking about kind of
our mechanism of inheritance is social learning. That's how
we learn from each other. Um, AND I think
the general kind of conclusion they reach is that
we're not just culture sponges, um, kind of like
we're talking about memes taking over our psychology like
little viruses. That depicts cultural learning as passive. So
I walk through the world and memes can hijack
my brain and I don't really get a vote
because I'm just this big dumb vehicle walking around
being driven by my memes, um. That doesn't seem
to be how cultural learning works. So people are
actually pretty selective with their learning. We learn some
concepts more easily than others. We find some things
more memorable than other things. We find some things
more emotionally evocative and attention grabbing than others. So
concepts in the world don't seem. HAVE equal access
to our evolved minds. Some things are just good
fits, but we're also, it's not just that we're
sitting back and some things are stickier for our
brains than others. Instead, we're actually like active participants
in our own cultural learning because cultural learning, it's
all about trying to learn how to survive and
thrive in the world. Um, AND, and we're really
active participants in that process. So we try to
look at the world and try to figure out
who do we want to learn from. Do I,
if I'm trying to learn how to be good
at something, do I just pick somebody at random
and start copying what they do? Um, THAT'S probably
not going to be a super great option. Um,
BUT there might be other strategies that I could
adopt to extract useful cultural information from the world.
Um, SO, The cultural evolution crowd has broadly sorted
these learning strategies into two kind of different, different
categories. So there's content biased learning, which is just
the idea that some concepts are sticky. So memory
biases would fit here, emotion biases where some information
interacts with our mental apparatus in a way that
it's more likely to stick around and get transmitted.
So that's content biases, and it seems like the
cognitive science of religion work was all about these
content biases. So minimally countering stuff is hyperactive agency
detection, if that was ever a thing that we
had substantiated, that's again another content bias, but that's
only. A portion of the cultural evolution picture because
we also care a lot about who we're learning
from and so we can think of these as
context biases. This is which sources of information do
we turn to and here you have strategies like
conformist learning, which is where, you know, I could
try to adopt what are kind of normative majority
opinions in the world or practices. And you could
think of if you were plopped down in a
new context and like you're plopped down in the
middle of the Amazon and you need to survive.
If you see other people there and most people
are, say, drinking from this spring, you can copy
that. They're all drinking and they haven't died. Um,
SO conformist learning can be good for kind of
like learning these basic skills. Um, NOW, conformist learning
will get you up to kind of cultural baseline,
but you're not, you're not really going to thrive.
If you want to get ahead, now you want
to instead of copying everyone, um, you want to
try to find ways to copy the people who
are the most successful. Um, SO you could copy
successful prestigious individuals. So we have learning biases for
trying to find who are the best people to
learn from, um. Uh, AND in that case, we
want to learn from successful people, um, which gives
successful people the potential to kind of exploit people,
because if let's say I'm, you know, some big
wig and people are sucking up to me to
try to get access to my privileged information. If
I got sick of them, I could give them
all bad information. I could tell them to go
eat poison mushrooms or something, and I just all
these suck ups. So it does look like we've
evolved some kind of epistemic defenses where we attend
to what Joe Henry could call credibility enhancing displays,
which is basically if people are willing to take
action to kind of prove their beliefs, that gives
us a kind of we lend a more credence
to the underlying beliefs, um. So that's just like
a quick illustration of the fuller arsenal of cultural
evolution where yes there are the content biases that
cognitive scientists of religion talk about, but there's also
this much bigger class of context biases which is
asking who we're learning from and which types of
cues are we paying attention to to kind of
prove the sincerity of people's beliefs.
And do you think that something like cultural group
selection plays a role in religion? And, and by
the way, what is cultural group selection?
Yeah, this is kind of fun and potentially tricky
territory. So in the book, at least I said
if we want to understand not just how people
came to have the capacity to believe in gods,
but if we want to understand at the broader
kind of global across time scale, how is it
that some religions have have really spread really fast
and most religions pop up and die out pretty
quickly. They just don't catch on. Um, AND so
I tried to pitch in the book building off
some work on religious prosociality that's been coming together
over the last 1520 years. The notion that if
we want to figure out which religions kind of
prosper and survive, we need to think about what
are the consequences for group functioning that. Different religious
beliefs, norms, and practices might have. So a concrete
way to look at this is if we consider
the shakers and the latter-day saints. These are two
different kind of Christian offshoot religious groups that hit
their heyday in the United States in the 18
and 1900s, and they both Started as kind of
utopian communes set a bit apart from society. The
shakers were known for what was at the time
radical egalitarianism. Women could assume leadership positions in the
church and in their in their communities to a
degree that you wouldn't necessarily expect from, you know,
18 and 1900s America. And, and then the Latter-day
Saints also popped up around the same time. Um,
AND we could look at specific religious beliefs and
see what that might have to do with the
success of these two religions over time. And so
different religious beliefs and norms can go in different
themes. So some sometimes they'll have cooperative norms. How
do we treat each other within the group? Or
you might have reproductive norms. Are we having more
kids or less kids in this? Um, AND LDS
and the Shakers really had strikingly different reproductive norms.
Uh, SO LDS, especially early on really encouraged large
families. Uh, PLURAL marriage was a thing among church
leaders, um, and, uh, yeah, have lots of kids,
take care of them. Your kids are going to
have lots of kids, and you can illustrate this
with, I think it's the status within either 50
or 60 years of his death. Brigham Young was
the second big LDS leader. Um, HE had multiple
wives, had something. 50 kids. A lot of his
sons went on to have multiple wives, tons of
kids, and so within, I think it was 50
years of Brigham Young's death, he had like 1000
living descendants, which is a staggering number. If you
think of any of your ancestors who had big
families, they didn't have 1000 living descendants within, within
a short time span after their death. So LDS
Church, really pro reproduction, have lots of kids. The
shakers, on the other hand, practiced universal celibacy. Uh,
THEY, they took their original sin very seriously, so
they said universal celibacy, um, no marriage. Now, you
have one group having lots of kids and one
mandating universal celibacy, which group do you think did
better over time? Uh, IT turns out LDS is
one of the faster growing religions in the world
over the last 100 years, um. And when I
did some digging, I think the, the current active
membership list in the Shakers' Church is like 3
people, um, because they're just, they're not reproducing, um.
And so that's just kind of one example of
how religious norms around one particular thing, in this
case reproduction, can have profound impacts for the long
run success of these two groups. If you have
norms that encourage reproduction, OK, your group's going to
grow. If you have norms that say no reproduction,
your group's going to dwindle. Um. So we could
think of religions as having lots of different norms,
not just reproduction, but also norms about, say, missionary
outreach or cooperation within or militaristic takeover. These are
like different settings that different religions could have. Cultural
group selection is just the idea that cultural groups
might kind of stabilize and cohere around different sets
of internally stable norms so that within each group
it pays to do what everybody else is doing.
Uh, IF you're in a higher reproduction group, yeah,
you're better off kind of going with the flow
and also having lots of kids. If you're in
a group that's all about missionary outreach, yeah, you,
you should kind of do that or move to
a different group that's a better fit for your,
for your interests. Um, AND if we have all
these different groups with different clusters of norms kind
of driven by their religious beliefs, then we could
think of the consequences that those different settings might
have on long run success and groups that find
good ways to promote stability and cooperation within the
group, um, promote reproduction in. Rearing promote missionary outreach.
These groups are going to thrive and spread, and
there's some reasonably compelling work over the years that
the kind of religious notion of these big moralizing
powerful gods who can monitor human behavior and they
care what people are thinking about and they care
how we treat each other. The beliefs in that
kind of God seem to be good at getting
people to be a bit more cooperative within the
group, which could have profound impacts for kind of
the long run success of these groups. So it
looks like the religions that have done well have
these kinds of big moralizing gods that can potentially
enable kind of cooperation to start ratcheting up in
our lineage.
So, uh, since you mentioned big gods, is there
a relationship between big gods and prosociality?
Um, YEAH, that's a great question. We can kind
of look at it at a few different levels
of analysis. Some people have done kind of broad
cross-cultural work and if we look at different groups
of people, there's some like good cross-cultural data sets
where you could code what kinds of religious beliefs
does this group have and then what's kind of
the levels of social complexity and coordination. So are
we seeing big cooperative societies. Um, VERSUS kind of
smaller, more localized ones, and you can simultaneously code,
well, do they have a big moralizing kind of
universalistic, universalistic god or is it a smaller local
god who might be morally concerned, but they're like
morally concerned about what's happening in the village, you
know, are the kids quiet at night as opposed
to, you know, matters of broad geopolitical import that
like a big moralizing God might have, um. And
there is some reasonably decent evidence on that that
groups that tend to hold more of these big
moralizing God beliefs do tend to show kind of
higher degrees of cooperative complexity. Some of that work
has been challenged because the data going into the
data set, especially the coding of. A lot of
it's being coded from early ethnographies, which are themselves
coming from like primary missionary contact in colonial days,
which is, you know, these might not have been
the most skilled ethnographic recorders and may have brought
some kind of cultural biases to that project. Um,
BUT we can also look at other ways where
Joe Henri and his team had a good paper
and I forget if it was Science or Nature,
they looked in a bunch of kind of smaller
scale, more like forager level societies, but could code
based on whether these societies also subscribe to kind
of one of the big world moralizing religions, so
Christianity, Islam, Judaism, things like that. And when they
code that it's groups that do hold these types
of big God beliefs are more anonymously generous in,
say, experimental economic games. So kind of at the
most zoomed out level I think we have reasonably
OK evidence that certain types of religious beliefs tend
to cluster together with certain types of cooperative outcomes,
and it generally points to a correlation between big
gods and kind of bigger, more complex cooperative societies.
We could drill down then and ask, well, do
we find similar evidence at the individual level? So
if I get individual believers into the lab and
say remind them of their religious beliefs, can I
make them more cooperative? Um, AND the idea there
is, you know, This is coming out of like
a social psychology tradition where we're interested in how
people act across different contexts because even the most
religious person in the world, religion is not front
and center 24/7. Like sometimes you're at the grocery
store buying groceries or you have a job or
maybe you have to navigate a queue on public
transit. Like religion just can't be the main point
of focus all the time, um. So potentially what
we could do as experimentalists is we could find
ways to bring religion from background to foreground and
see if people act a bit different. So there's
been kind of a thriving cottage industry and social
psyche on what's called religious priming, which is just
basically it's a bunch of different experiments where you
find ways to get people to think religious thoughts.
And if they're, if you kind of get religion
on their mind, you can see if they kind
of behave differently in other ways. And one of
the early big studies on this came out in
2007. Zoom Sharif and RNR and Za published this
paper where they claimed, all right, if we have
people do a subtle experimental task that gets them
to it primes religious thinking and then have them
play a game that measures anonymous generosity. In their
first paper they reported these whoppingly large effects where
you have people play this little word game that
gets them thinking about religion and then all of
a sudden they're way more generous in an experimental
economic game and yeah, that spawned a cottage industry
where by now there's dozens of papers taking their
same experimental manipulation where they play this weird little
word game that supposedly gets them thinking about religion.
And then you plug in whatever outcome measure that
you want. It felt like for a while, a
few times a year there'd be a new paper
linking that religious prime to a different outcome. But
some researchers, most notably Robert Ross has pointed out
none of these religious priming studies have ever survived
an independent replication attempt. So every time somebody comes
back and says, I'm going to take this little
scrambled sentence game that the. Paper used as a
religious prime and I'm going to pair it with
some outcome measure. EVERY time so far that somebody's
gone back and retried one of those experiments with
a tight experimental protocol, they can't get the same
results, which is interesting because I think the theoretical
story that We'd expect these religious cooperation effects to
only turn up when religion's on people's minds. This
makes sense. It's also something we see in the
world where successful religions find ways to remind people
of religion throughout, like you can think of like
5 times daily called the prayer in Islam. That's
a way to remind people of religious norms throughout
the day. Or sometimes you'll see evangelicals with like
the What would Jesus do bracelet. That's just a
way to remind yourself a bunch throughout the day.
So. I'm guessing that successful religions are doing they're,
they're having these religious reminders because they work, but
then we have experimental laboratory evidence that seems not
to hold up and along with my colleague at
Brunel, Ayanna Willard, we're doing some projects now where
we're just looking at that experimental task that they
use where people play this weird little word game
to prime religion. Um, AND we've just gone back
to check and say, well, are people more likely
to be thinking about religion after they've done that
task than otherwise? And the answer is no. So
the priming manipulation doesn't actually do anything, which means
that that initial priming result is almost certainly a
false positive. It just hasn't held up well. But
other researchers have found other ways to test the
same hypothesis without using that same priming manipulation. And
it turns out if you use kind of a
more valid experimental manipulation, you can still get the
same results that they reported. You don't get these
bigly large effects. Those were always larger than we
should have taken seriously, but you can, enough people
by now have done studies where if you More
overtly remind people of their religious faith, you can
kind of alter their behavior a bit and so
that work has largely supported this religious prosociality view
even though the most famous, most cited religious priming
study probably doesn't report anything we should pay attention
to.
So let me ask you now because we've gone
through several different ways that people approach religion and
how it gets transmitted, etc. Uh, WHAT about indoctrination?
Because there are people out there who claim that
religion is mostly or at least to some extent
the result of indoctrination. Is that true in any
way?
Yeah, that's a really widespread belief out there that,
you know, religion persists because we have these coercive
adults who are forcing it down their kids' throats
and Justin Barrett and some of his religion books,
he's taken pretty steady aim on that where he
said, look, I'm not saying that there's no religious
indoctrination in the world, but he's kind of saying
there's not enough indoctrination to explain the high levels
of belief we see. So we see um. A
lot of social transmission of religious beliefs, that's not
heavy-handed indoctrination, but it's just kind of like basic
teaching and learning and observational learning on kids' part.
So we can have social transmission of things without
it being coercive indoctrination, and I would certainly agree
with him on that point that we have plenty
of evidence that religion is socially transmitted and very
little evidence that heavy-handed indoctrination is kind of the
primary source of, of that social transmission. What's always
been interesting to me is you will see that
the indoctrination account is sometimes widespread in new atheist
circles where they'll say like Dawkins has written that
like just raising kids religious is child abuse, and
he's mostly leaning on the indoctrination side here. And
this has been puzzling to me because in his
religion books, he's postulated, as we were mentioning, this
kind of gullibility angle where kids are so gullible,
they just believe whatever their parents say. Um, BUT
then he's also saying, well, religion persists because of
this hard, heavy-handed indoctrination, but those two proposals postulate
entirely different child psychologies. So if kids believe whatever
their parents tell them, You wouldn't need any indoctrination
because parents could just tell them whatever they want.
There's no effort there, whereas heavy-handed indoctrination implies a
child psychology that's somewhat resistant to picking up these
concepts. That's why we need indoctrination. So if we,
if the gullibility angle was true, we wouldn't need
any indoctrination. If the indoctrination angle was true, the
gullibility one wouldn't make any sense. So pick a
lane, guys, um. Yes, so I think again, I
mean the main point here is social transmission, absolutely
yes, indoctrination, it doesn't seem to be necessary.
Do we have any idea at all about how
many atheists are there in the world and across
different societies?
Yeah, so I've come to think over the last
5 or 6 years that Really just pinning down
some basic facts about atheism will really help us
kind of develop theory, um, because even some of
the basics like how many atheists are there out
there turns out to not be that easy to
estimate, estimate and some of our existing estimates are
probably not accurate. Um, SO for global estimates it's
really tricky to come up with a solid one
because individual countries don't kind of consistently ask about
religious beliefs and things like a census, so we
don't have apples to apples comparisons. Even some large
scale polling companies will ask people in lots of
different countries about attitudes and values, including about religious
beliefs, but there's kind of patchy and inequitable coverage
of countries on these kinds of survey. So we
have really good data and coverage in North America,
Western Europe, parts of Asia, a lot of Africa,
we have very little data coming out of it.
A lot of the global South really is understudied
in a lot of this, so we just don't
have great data. And then the survey companies don't
necessarily ask the same questions about religious belief, and
they don't necessarily ask questions that directly translate to
an atheism prevalence estimate, um. But we could look,
say, just within the US, where we've had good
polling for decades, and so Gallup and Pew, for
instance, on polls where there's different approaches to measuring
it. One of them I call it the religious
menu approach where you'd say, all right, pick your
religious identity from a list. Are you Catholic, Protestant,
Jewish, Sunni, Shia? Um, Zoroastrian, atheist, agnostic, whatever, and
then you can just look at how many people
check the atheist box and in the US that
number of waivers, but we're only looking at like
2 to 5% of people would check the atheist
box. Um, NOW another way you can measure atheist
prevalence is a lot of the times these survey
companies will ask people, Do you believe in God?
Yes or no. Um, BY definition, the people who
said no are atheists, whether or not they choose
to identify with that as like a positive keg
for me. That's just what the word means. If
you say you don't believe in God, technically you're
an atheist. Um, AND those surveys will return a
higher estimate than the initial one. So it might
be 2 to 5% of people identify positively with
the label atheist, but in the US nowadays, the
surveys are showing something like 17 to 20% of
people would say, I don't believe in God, which
is a pretty big gap. Like our atheism estimate
just within the US is 4 times higher for
one question than the other one, Now imagine scaling
that up to surveys in a bunch of different
countries, and then you've got a bunch of countries
where we don't have, you know, anything even that
direct. So it becomes really hard to try to
come up with a global picture just because the
data aren't there. So what we've tried to do
is look in places where we have good coverage
and try to see, well, even then if we
just use that kind of 17 to 20% estimate
of people in the US saying they don't believe
in God. Could we then say that no more
than 20% of the US are atheists, um, but
some work I've had over the years with students
Maxi Naha and Nava Kaloi now, where we've tried
to find ways to indirectly measure atheist prevalence in
a way that people don't have to. Just out
and out tell us they're an atheist because atheism
is heavily stigmatized in large parts of the world,
including in the US People hold really persistent negative
attitudes towards atheists, and it specifically seems to cohere
around themes of moral distrust. So if you're a
pollster and you're asking people about their religious beliefs,
the atheists, you're kind of asking them to self-identify
as belonging to a stigmatized group. And if you're
ever asking, trying to get an estimate of something
that's socially undesirable and you're doing it with self-reports,
you're going to need a lot of people who
probably fit that category but just don't want to
tell you about it. Um, SO that led us
to think that a lot of these. ARE probably
underestimating atheist prevalence, and if we could find experimental
tasks that allow people to signal that they don't
believe in God without having to just come out
and say it, we might get even higher atheist
prevalence estimates. So we published a paper in 2018
or so at the time, Gallup and Pew were
saying that there were 10 or 11% atheists in
the US using the Do you believe in God?
Yes, no measure. And when we ran a survey
with a kind of fun indirect measurement test, our
estimates were coming back at 26%. So they're saying
11%. We're saying it's probably more like 26%, um.
And we've since kind of refined that experimental task,
and we're in the process of kind of analyzing
data where we ran the same survey in the
United States, Argentina, China, France, Saudi Arabia, and Indonesia
just to see, you know, we've got a big
gap in the US between self-reported atheism and indirect
estimates. Do we find similar gaps in other places?
And in that sample, you know, we have the
US again. Uh, WE had a couple of countries
where religion is again, you know, probably even, even
a bigger deal. Um, IT'S kind of more socially
reinforced. So in Saudi Arabia and Indonesia, for instance,
these are countries where people really report it's important
to be religious here. Um, YOU, uh, In like
Gallup and Pew surveys, they'll ask people, Do you
agree with the statement? You must believe in a
God to be moral, which is a pretty heavy-handed
way to look at kind of the social pressure
favoring religion in those countries it's like 90+% of
people say absolutely you must be a religious believer
to be moral. But then we have countries like
China and France that have swung in the other
direction. They're heavily secular. Most people are self-reporting that
they don't believe in a God. Um, AND at
least at our early peaks of the data in
all of these countries, we're finding evidence that atheism
is undercounted, so we're finding kind of closeted atheists
when we measure it indirectly. Now in China and
France, there's only a few of them. It's not,
it's not, you know, in a country where 80%
of people say they don't believe in God, there's
not much point to hiding that you're an atheist
too. Um, BUT we're finding sizeable gaps in Indonesia
and Saudi Arabia where not as many people are
self-reporting that they don't believe in God, but on
the indirect estimate it's, it's reasonably high again. And
so really everywhere we've looked, we've found that the
self-report estimate is too low, um. So if I
had to hazard a guess globally for how many
atheists we have, Phil Zuckerman in 2007, looking only
at self-report data, estimated 500 to 700 million atheists
in the world, if I figure kind of 100,
2007, the world's changed since then, both in terms
of global population and spread of self-reported atheism. And
then if we tack on the recent evidence that
we're finding atheists who are closeted everywhere we've looked
so far, I'd say we could push the estimate
up to 2 billion maybe.
So around 1/4 of the global population.
Yeah, I'd place my bet somewhere in there, which
is interesting because going back to cognitive science and
religion, one of their things was, oh, since religion
has emerged as a byproduct, religion comes naturally, and
atheism must be this kind of, it's hard to
get going. It must take cognitive effort to maintain
it, and some of the cognitive science of religion
books explicitly say atheism is rare. Whereas if our
data is saying, well, 1 in 4 people might
be atheists, that's not particularly rare, guys. It's time
to rethink some of those theoretical assumptions.
And so, let's talk a little bit more about
that. Where does atheism come from? Are there different
paths that people follow and what are some of
the main factors that play a role there? Does
it have to do with, for example, specific cognitive
works or with environmental factors, life events? What do
we know about it?
Yeah, so on this one we've done a fair
amount of work over the last decade or so
trying to tease apart, you know, are there different
factors that nudge people towards atheism? Are there different
pathways to atheism? And in this work we kind
of thought of, well, what are the basic building
blocks of building blocks of religion and what might
be disrupted to lead to atheism instead. Um, AND
we kind of pin down as things that need
to be in place to have religious belief. One,
we need to have kind of the social cognitive
mind perception abilities that make it easy to think
about other minds. That seems to be from cognitive
science of religion, the core cognitive building block that
gives us the capacity for belief. Second, there's the
motivational side of it where we need to be
in circumstances where it seems like a good idea
to appeal to gods. A third is cultural learning.
So as we were talking about with cultural evolution
where we're picking beliefs up from others, we especially
seem to attend to these credibility enhancing displays of
faith where if we see other people in our
community doing stuff that seems like it would be
really costly if they weren't sincere believers, then that
ratchets up our own belief. That's really important. Um,
AND so we kind of thought, well, these are
the things that need to be in place to
get police and maybe atheism just comes from disruptions
in them. So for instance, uh, We kind of
speculated that there might be 4, probably more, but
4 that we could really pin down different pathways
to atheism. One is if you imagine that we
need this kind of mind perception ability and and
kind of mentalizing theory of mind, whatever you want
to call it, if that's kind of the core
building block, then it turns out there's individual differences
in people's advanced mentalizing abilities. Some people find it
easy and practically effortless to track complex social dynamics.
Other people like this guy don't like that task
of trying to track complicated things like that socially,
and it turns out there's small and not particularly
strong correlations where people who have really excellent high-end
mentalizing abilities tend to be a bit more religious
than people who find advanced mentalizing tasks a little
trickier. Um, SO that's one potential pathway to atheism,
kind of focusing on the, the underlying cognitive apparatus
that makes it easy to think about gods. Um,
BUT
in, in that, let me just ask you, in
that case, people who are on the autism spectrum
would probably tend more toward atheism.
Potentially we ran one kind of self-report study years
ago that pointed in that direction. I think the
consensus now from people who have done a better
job looking at this like Inguassuri is a researcher
who does a lot of good work with religious
beliefs among people on the autism spectrum. And what
she seems to be finding is there might be
a case where there's kind of less of this
felt personal relationship with a God, but you'll find
strong religious beliefs that just kind of have a
distinct flavor to them. So it's not that, you
know, people are atheists, it's that they express religion
quite differently, um, and Yeah, so there's the mentalizing
factor, the motivational stuff that was kind of our
second building block, and that one kind of coming
from sociology, it looks like where religion flourishes in
the world is places where life is kind of
tough and unpredictable and uncertain, whereas if we look
at where atheism has taken off, kind of the
poster child here would be Western Europe post-World Wars,
things secularized very rapidly. And that's also a time
where a lot of these countries had accumulated some
wealth, put it into developing a good social safety
net and kind of public education system, and some
sociologists like Norris and Englehart would call this existential
security. It's just kind of the. Day to day
stability and security that citizens experience in a place.
It turns out as existential security gets higher, religion
tends to fade away. People just are less motivated
by first public religious stuff, but then private belief
fades as kind of life gets comfortable. So there's
our second pathway to atheism is just existential security.
And then I think the biggest one then is
looking at cultural learning of beliefs. So we see
people adopting the religious beliefs that are credibly modeled
by members of their community. So if I'm in
a community where I see everybody engaging in potentially
costly rituals to Shiva or Papagere or Yahweh or
whatever else, I'm more likely to believe in just
the God that all these displays seem to be
directed to. Um, NOW if I grow up somewhere
where either those credibility enhancing displays are just across
the board lower where nobody is doing the public
religious stuff, or potentially in a pluralistic spot where
my cultural models are all directing their creds at
different gods, then basically I'm getting a mixed signal
and I would be less likely to believe in
any of them. Um, SO one pathway to atheism
is just arising through a lack of consistent cultural
cues supporting one given God. And then our final
pathway to atheism, I know I trashed it early
on in the interview talking about the rational atheism
thesis, but going back to the fact that there
were these small correlations between rational thinking and atheism
in some contexts, I think we could salvage a
little bit of the idea that in some places
it does seem like rational thinking might. NUDGE people
to be a bit less religious than they otherwise
might, but I think when we put all those
four factors together and kind of ask which ones
matter the most, the cultural one is consistently the
best predictor. So growing up around fewer or inconsistent
credible displays of religious faith predicts atheism in subsequent
generations. So that one is definitely the most, you
know, if we're thinking of these as four pathways,
that's a superhighway, and the other ones are little
like footpaths through the woods.
So, taking into account that information and also the
data you mentioned about the percentage of the world
population with the atheist, uh, do we, should we
also say that atheism is natural, like, for example,
the cognitive scientists of religion say that religion is
natural.
Yes, absolutely, and I think it was one of
the later chapters in my book. I tried to
reflect on all these different lines of evidence that
we talked about. And if you read, especially some
of the public facing books coming out of cognitive
science and religion, they'd say religion's natural, atheism is
unnatural, and they don't mean unnatural in that it's
like evil or wrong or impossible. They're just saying
all else equal. We seem to be built in
a way that religion comes easily, whereas atheism takes
a bit of work. Um, AND I think that
was an assumption that they stated as a conclusion
because when we've gone back to check the evidence,
it doesn't look like it takes effortful rational thinking
to be atheists, and in fact effortful rational thinking
is not a particularly good predictor of atheism. If
they're saying, oh, atheism is difficult and challenging and
emerges relatively unnaturally, that doesn't seem to explain broad
kind of cross-cultural patterns in atheism. Um, WHERE we
see lots of atheism is places that first kind
of beefed up their existential security and then as
public religiosity faded, that's the credibility enhancing displays that
learners needed to see. So we get a generation
of people who don't see those credibility enhancing displays
and they just naturally grow up as atheists because
they've never gotten the consistent cultural input to believe
in any one God. So I think if you
put it all together. Um, YOU know, do we
want to say is religion natural, is atheism natural?
I think they're both perfectly natural and it just
kind of comes down to cultural context. And in
that view, I think atheism seems far more natural
under this cultural evolution and form theory than cognitive
science of religion would have said 15 years ago
probably.
So let me ask you now, what are some
of the most common ideas that people have about
atheists, particularly when it comes to their morality and
their being able to trust them, or that is
that they are trustworthy people. What do people tend
to think about them?
Yeah, looking at people's negative perceptions of atheists is
it's probably the research project that I've had going
for the longest in various ways. It goes back
to like my master's thesis where In 2006 or
so, I remember looking at some surveys out there
where they were looking at kind of general cultural
inclusion and exclusion and the general way this is
framed in the US, as they say, would you
vote for a well qualified member of your own
political party if they happen to be black or
a woman or a Jewish, or you could plug
in whatever group you want and then you just
look at people's kind of stated voting intention and
use that as a proxy for cultural inclusion. And
in those polls in 2006, I remember seeing some
where people were broadly supportive of candidates from a
wide range of backgrounds, and atheists was like the
one group that couldn't crack the 50% barrier. And
I remember thinking that's a really weird group to
have strong feelings about, because especially like US in
the early 2000s, there wasn't much of a collective
identity for atheists. This wasn't a group of people
that you could readily identify out in the world.
If you even think of it as a group
of us, a bunch of people who don't believe
in God, they didn't do a lot of groupish
stuff. So it seemed like an odd one for
people to have strong feelings about. Um, AND the
research over the years we've kind of Hit on
the working model that what's driving negative perceptions of
atheists is a deep-seated kind of moral distrust. People
are assuming that religion is where morality comes from,
and since atheists don't have religious beliefs, how do
we know that they're moral? Um, AND, and we
found this in different ways over the years where
we could describe people engaging in different moral violations
and then just kind of Uh, subtly look to
see what our, our participants' intuitions are about who's
doing this stuff. So we could describe somebody, um,
Who's, you know, violent. They're hurting animals for fun,
or we could describe somebody who's, you know, a
sexual deviant. They engage in consensual incest with their
sister or we could describe any of them, we've
tried a long list of pretty grisly moral violations
and across all of them, people assume that the
perpetrator doesn't believe in God. So people really seem
to think that. Uh, THE people out there doing
immoral stuff must not believe in God, because if
they did believe in God, they wouldn't do that
stuff. Um, THAT'S the just
to, just to clarify, when you mentioned people, are
you referring to simply religious people or is it
that atheists themselves also think that about other atheists?
Yeah, that's a super important clarification point. So we've
run these surveys in a bunch of different ways,
and what's interesting is you find much larger effects
among religious participants where they're the ones who are
really saying like, Yeah, this guy who is a
serial killer, definitely an atheist, but even our atheist
participants, if we have kind of subtle indirect measures
of attitudes, they're showing the same pattern. So we
had one of them where we had a study
that we ran in 13 countries, including some highly
secular countries, and we were also able to look
at individual level participant beliefs. So some some of
our participants were atheists. And we found that even
atheists in highly secular countries intuitively assume that serial
killers have to be atheists, and we have some
other tasks too where we're just kind of looking
intuitively do people seem to think it would be
better or worse if there were more atheists in
the world? And we're finding that even atheists at
a gut level are saying, well, It wouldn't be
great to have more atheists, and we're getting that
response pattern from like atheists in Sweden, where most
people are atheists, and they're saying, well, a lot
of us are atheists, but I don't know if
we need more of us. So but I should
definitely note that the effects among atheist participants are
a lot smaller, but we're not seeing a reversal.
We're not seeing atheist participants saying, Well, the serial
killer must be religious because he's different from me.
They're saying, Well, the serial killer might be atheist
too.
And so those are the thoughts people all about
atheists, but what does the research say about them?
I mean, can we trust them? Are are atheists
really more predisposed toward immorality or amorality? What do
we know about that?
Yeah, that's a fantastic question. I've seen one that
came up in my doctoral dissertation defense where I
was presenting some of these results on people distrusting
atheists, and one committee member said, Well, isn't it
perfectly rational to not trust atheists? AND to unpack
it, he said, Well, we all have a lot
of reasons why we don't do bad things. So
maybe you're in a store and you don't shoplift
because there's a security camera and you don't want
to get caught. Maybe you don't want the police
to get you. Maybe you'll feel guilty because you're
thinking about your poor grandma who told you not
to steal. So we all have those reasons. And
then religious people have one more that God told
you not to do this. So isn't it perfectly
rational to trust the person who has 4 reasons
not to shoplift instead of the person who only
has 3. Um, SO that Kind of the logic,
and I think it does make a fair bit
of sense, but we can actually go check the
data out in the world in various ways to
say, well, does the world look like we'd expect
if atheists actually were as untrustworthy as they're perceived
to be? And there's different ways we could look
at that. So we could just say, well, at
a country by country level, are places with more
atheists scarier than places without. Turns out the opposite's
true in a lot of ways. Now, the era
of causation is going from atheism to stable societies.
It's probably running the other way as we were
just talking about, um. But yeah, if it if
it really turned out that serial killers were all
atheists, we'd expect that the atheist countries would have
more serial killers. It doesn't seem to be the
case. Or we could actually look kind of more
fine grained at the individual level, and there's a
great paper called Everyday Morality by Wilhel Hoffman and
colleagues, and so they did something called EMA, what
does that stand for, something momentary assessment. Basically people
had a smartphone app that would ping them a
few times throughout the day at random intervals. And
just kind of ask them what they were up
to, and they were specifically interested in kind of
morally relevant stuff. So have you done anything morally
good or morally bad? Have you seen anything morally
good? Um, AND they did this study with, I
think it was like 1300 people around the US,
followed them for a period of time just to
try to get these random snapshots throughout the day
of like what are people's moment to moment moral
lives like. And they also had some demographic stuff
that they asked people and they could say, well,
let's look at the people who are not at
all religious and compare them to religious people. Do
we find, for instance, that religious people are more
likely to engage in kind of pro-social positive moral
stuff? Is it the case that it's the, the
non-religious people who are engaging in immoral things? Um,
AND when they crunch all the numbers, you'll find
some kind of like interest. NUANCED differences in how
people are approaching it, but the overall baseline rates
of committing immoral stuff or committing moral stuff, no
difference whatsoever across the religious spectrum. Everybody in their
lives is kind of about the same level of
morality. And that dovetails with a lot of other
results now. You can look at results on, you
know, are kids raised religious, more generous than kids
who are raised not religious? Turns out there's no
difference whatsoever if you do the stats right on
that. So I had a whole chapter in the
book where I was kind of saying, here's all
the ways you could look at this, and time
and time again it looks like there's not much
of a difference, or sometimes you'll see like a
moral difference, not an overall amount of morality, but
you'll find kind of subtle differences in like nuanced
how people are thinking about morality, um which totally
makes sense, but in terms of Do we have
evidence that atheists are any less morally trustworthy than
anybody else? No. And, and by now we actually
enough people have looked, so it's not just the
case that we don't have that evidence because nobody's
tried to find it. It's that everywhere we have
this good kind of atheist religious contrast, we're not
seeing a big difference today.
So even in terms of generosity, there's not a
big difference, right? I mean, I'm asking you because
I've heard many times on the news people covering
studies which supposedly demonstrate that religious people tend to
be more generous than atheists.
Um, ON that kind of charitable giving, actually in
the book I thought about doing a deep dive
on some of that work because yeah, you're right,
it pops up a bunch. The general pattern by
my reading is religious people, for instance, give more
money to charity and do more volunteerism. But they,
they tend to give money to their religious charity
or they volunteer their time with their church, so
it gets a lot more complicated once you kind
of tease apart where is this money going, which
are the causes given, and if you run it
through a filter of are they helping in-group. Uh,
ARE they, are they doing stuff for their religious
group? Um, THINGS balance out a lot more once
you factor that in that a lot of this
kind of religious generosity and volunteerism advantage is explained
by them doing more stuff for their own communities,
um.
OK. So, I have 2 more questions I want
to ask you. The first one is, what do
we know about the future of religion and atheism?
Are we seeing any specific trends?
Yeah, this is a fun one because you can
go back and see big time thinkers in this
field going back for 100 years and generally these
like enlightenment thinkers are saying, guys, religion's on its
last legs. We've seen religion's going to fade away
within our lifetime, and you can, you can find
quotes going back 100 years where people keep saying
religion's on the way out, religion's on the way
out. And hey, guess what, religion is still here.
Uh, NONE of those predictions held up. Um, AND
I think in part they got their predictions wrong
because they had an incorrect model for how religion
and atheism work. So they're assuming that once we
have, you know, industrial revolution and the onward march
of scientific. Progress and just kind of general modernity
that religion would look foolish and childish and people
would turn away from it in favor of all
of our new cool technological gizmos. But as we
were just talking about the pathways to atheism, that
wasn't particularly one of them. So they were predicting
the future of atheism based on an incorrect model
of how people become atheists, but I think we
can come up with a good prediction about the
future of atheism if we realize if we just
kind of look at where we've seen secularization in
the world. Again, it's these places where they they
beef up existential security and then over subsequent generations,
the cultural learning of faith. Dip. So if we
want to predict the future of religion, we kind
of need to predict the future of kind of
social stability, um, which is tricky because, I mean,
in part because I'm trained as a cultural psychologist
and not a future demographer of world geopolitics or
whatever that would be. Um, SO the guess I,
I put in the book is, um, One thing
that I've not seen in a lot of people's
predictions about the future of atheism, so I was
just at a little meeting where people were talking
about, oh, are we going to see the onward
march of secularization like we've seen in Europe where
countries are getting less and less religious with technological
and economic progress and all the panelists were kind
of hesitantly predicting, yes, we're going to continue to
see this because, you know, technology, medicine, all this,
and what struck me there is If we're thinking
about predicting religion by predicting social stability, I think
the elephant in the room for predicting the future
of religion is adaptation to climate change. So I
think our, our world is changing in big and
drastic ways, and I think Yeah, I think we're
going to see a lot of instability in the
next 100 years, and those are the conditions where
religion does really well. Now I think we're going
to see some already wealthy countries are going to
kind of condense, keep what's theirs, so we see
like the rise of a lot of kind of
right wing governments that are mostly built on keep
immigrants out mentality. So I think that's kind of
a A foreshadowing of where we're going to see
a lot of countries go as the increasingly large
parts of the world become unlivable and we have
a lot of migration and a lot of chaos,
we'll see some affluent countries just try to preserve
stability that they've got and I think in those
Stable secular enclaves will continue to see your religion
diminish, but I think globally I think we're going
to have far things are going to be far
too tumultuous to see any sort of gradual phasing
out of religion unless we kind of radically alter
our approach to climate and looking after each other
basically. So I think religion will do just fine
in part because we've created global conditions where we're
going to see a lot of insecurity.
But when it comes to religions themselves, I've seen
data that say that uh after 2050, something like
that, Islam will be the number one religion in
the world. Is that correct?
Um, I mean, I think some of those projection
projections make sense in terms of kind of what
they've built into the model, but they're all somewhat
assuming the kind of broad living conditions over the
next 50 years are going to look like the
last 50 years, and I think with climate insecurity
things things are going to change, um, so. Yeah,
I, I'm hesitant to go with any model that
doesn't have something explicitly built in on, you know,
billions of people needing to find new homes.
Right. So my last question then, do you think
it would ever be possible for us to have
a society composed of just atheists?
Yeah, I think we could have that. I think
if um If we kind of get through this
little climate hiccup that we're just starting to enter
and can kind of radically reshape our societies to
kind of build in caring about equity and caring
about just general well-being of most people, I think
we can create conditions and cultural conditions where atheism
is going to come very easily for people. Um,
WHETHER we make the societal choices that create cultures
where that can happen. There I'm less optimistic, but
I, yeah, I think absolutely the potential is there
since it's such kind of a a religious belief
and disbelief are so culturally subscribed that I think,
yeah, we just, we need to create cultures where
it can happen.
Great. So the book is again this belief, The
Origins of Atheism in the Religious Species. I'm leaving
a link to it in the, there it is.
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
of the interview. And Doctor Gervais, just before we
go, apart from the book, where can people find
your work on the internet?
Um, THEY can find me. I need to update
my website, but if you just look for Willdrive.com,
I'll have some of my research stuff up there.
Um, I try to, if I ever publish a
paper and it's like stuck behind a paywall, I
try to find a way to put a free
version up on my website. So track me down
there. You can find me. I'm off Twitter these
days, but I'm on BlueSky. If you look for
Wgervais, I'm on there. That's about it, I guess.
I keep a low profile outside of that.
Great. So thank you so much for doing this.
It's been a very informative and fun conversation, so
thank you so much.
Thank you so much. We covered some fascinating. Thanks.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, asila dearraujurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Francaortolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon,
Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.